[Docs]: Metrics and Tracing (#1207)
llm-d/llm-d: docs/wip-docs-new/resources/monitoring/metrics.md

# Metrics

This guide shows how to collect and visualize metrics from an llm-d deployment using Prometheus and Grafana.

> [!NOTE]
> This guide assumes you have a running llm-d deployment with an InferencePool and model servers. See the [quickstart](../../getting-started/quickstart.md) if you need to set one up first.

## Prerequisites

> - A running llm-d deployment (InferencePool + EPP + model servers)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A running llm-d basic stack (llm-d Router + model servers)
```

> - [Helm](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/) (for scheduler/EPP charts and optional Prometheus install)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Helm](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/) (for llm-d Router charts and optional Prometheus install)
```

```

For HTTPS/TLS (required by autoscalers like WVA):

```bash
./docs/monitoring/scripts/install-prometheus-grafana.sh --enable-tls
```

Verify the installation:

```bash
kubectl get pods -n llm-d-monitoring
```

Expected output:

```text
NAME                                                     READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
alertmanager-llmd-kube-prometheus-stack-alertmanager-0    2/2     Running   0          30s
llmd-grafana-xxxxxxxxx-xxxxx                             3/3     Running   0          30s
prometheus-llmd-kube-prometheus-stack-prometheus-0        2/2     Running   0          30s
```

### Platform-Specific Configuration

#### OpenShift

OpenShift provides a built-in Prometheus stack via User Workload Monitoring. Enable it instead of installing a separate Prometheus:

- See the [OpenShift monitoring documentation](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/monitoring_stack_for_red_hat_openshift/4.18/html-single/configuring_user_workload_monitoring/index) to enable User Workload Monitoring
- Prometheus endpoint: `https://thanos-querier.openshift-monitoring.svc.cluster.local:9091`

#### GKE

**Option 1 — Google Managed Prometheus (recommended)**

> GKE clusters include [Google Managed Prometheus (GMP)](https://cloud.google.com/stackdriver/docs/managed-prometheus) by default. To use GMP as a Grafana data source, follow the [GMP Grafana integration guide](https://docs.cloud.google.com/stackdriver/docs/managed-prometheus/query#ui-grafana).

Reviewer: pls update as per @JeffLuoo suggestion

Author: > pls update as per @JeffLuoo suggestion

This was addressed in commit 0ed9124 the GKE section already offers GMP with the Grafana frontend proxy as Option 1 (recommended) and standalone Prometheus as Option 2. You can see it at lines 65-80 of the current file. Let me know if you'd like changes to the wording.
